#########################
Where are the Brexiteers?
#########################

.. code-links:: clear

See: :doc:`brexit_problem` for background.

We are going to load this data using the Pandas_ package for data analysis.

Pandas is a large, powerful package that is very popular for data analysis.
You might want to read the `Pandas documentation`_ and you will find lots of
help with Google searches and the StackOverflow_ question answer site.

First we *import* the package, so it is ready to use.  Actually we will import
it, and also give it a nice short name so we do not have to do much typing to
use the package:

.. nbplot::

    >>> import pandas

The data file that you just downloaded should be called
``audit_of_political_engagement_14_2017.tab``.  We load the data file into
memory with Pandas:

.. nbplot::

    >>> audit_data = pandas.read_table('audit_of_political_engagement_14_2017.tab')

We now have something called a "data frame":

.. nbplot::

    >>> type(audit_data)
    <class 'pandas.core.frame.DataFrame'>

The ``DataFrame`` type of object is a table, rather like a spreadsheet, where
there is one row per person surveyed, and one column for each question in the
survey.  The columns have helpful names that you can read about in the data
dictionary:

.. nbplot::

    >>> audit_data
          cu041  cu042  cu043  cu044  cu045  cu046  cu047   ...     week      wts  numage  weight0  sgrade_grp  age_grp  region2
    0         0      0      0      0      1      1      0   ...      648  3.41659      37  3.41659           1        4        3
    1         0      0      0      0      0      0      0   ...      648  2.68198      55  2.68198           2        6        3
    2         0      0      0      0      1      0      0   ...      648  0.79379      71  0.79379           2        7        4
    3         0      0      0      0      1      0      1   ...      648  1.40580      37  1.40580           1        4        4
    4         0      0      0      1      1      0      1   ...      648  0.89475      42  0.89475           2        4        4
    5         1      1      0      0      0      0      0   ...      648  3.22535       0  3.22535           1        1        3
    ...
    <BLANKLINE>
    [1771 rows x 370 columns]

The data frame has columns for all the questions listed in the data
dictionary:

.. nbplot::

    >>> audit_data.columns
    Index(['cu041', 'cu042', 'cu043', 'cu044', 'cu045', 'cu046', 'cu047', 'cu048',
           'cu049', 'cu0410',
           ...
           'intten', 'cx_971_980', 'serial', 'week', 'wts', 'numage', 'weight0',
           'sgrade_grp', 'age_grp', 'region2'],
          dtype='object', length=370)

To reduce clutter, we first make a new data frame that just has the two
questions we are interested in:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # Select the age and Brexit vote questions only
    >>> brexit_age = audit_data[['numage', 'cut15']]
    >>> brexit_age
          numage  cut15
    0         37      1
    1         55      1
    2         71      2
    3         37      1
    4         42      1
    5          0      1
    ...
    <BLANKLINE>
    [1771 rows x 2 columns]

The variable name ``cut15`` is not very memorable, and we care about
memorable, because good names help to keep our ideas clear as we are working.
We rename the columns from their original names to more memorable ones:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # Rename the columns to be more memorable
    >>> brexit_age.columns = ['age', 'brexit']
    >>> brexit_age
          age  brexit
    0      37       1
    1      55       1
    2      71       2
    3      37       1
    4      42       1
    5       0       1
    ...
    <BLANKLINE>
    [1771 rows x 2 columns]

Wait |--| there's something odd in those numbers.

We were lucky to spot that, but in any case, we want to check our data before
we continue.  The first thing we do is make a histogram of the ages.

To do this we first need to load the standard Python plotting library,
Matplotlib_.

.. mpl-interactive::

Remember that we did an "import" for the Pandas package above.  Now we import
part of ``matplotlib``.

.. nbplot::

    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot

What type of thing is ``matplotlib.pyplot``?

.. nbplot::

    >>> type(matplotlib.pyplot)
    <class 'module'>

We use the ``hist`` function in ``matplotlib.pyplot`` to plot a histogram of
the respondents' ages:

.. nbplot::

    >>> matplotlib.pyplot.hist(brexit_age['age'])
    (...)

It's very boring to keep typing ``matplotlib.pyplot``, so we can give it a
shorter name:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # Set the name "plt" to point to the "matplotlib.pyplot" module
    >>> plt = matplotlib.pyplot
    >>> type(plt)
    <class 'module'>

Now we can be more concise:

.. nbplot::

    >>> plt.hist(brexit_age['age'])
    (...)

There appear to be a few subjects with age of 0.

It looks as if the survey coders are using the value 0 to mean that the person
did not state their age.  We will have to clean that up.  We do that by
selecting the cases that have ages not equal to 0.

First we get the age column into its own variable.

.. nbplot::

    >>> age_column = brexit_age['age']
    >>> age_column
    0       37
    1       55
    2       71
    3       37
    4       42
    5        0
    ...
    1770    25
    Name: age, Length: 1771, dtype: int64

This variable is of type ``Series``:

.. nbplot::

    >>> type(age_column)
    <class 'pandas.core.series.Series'>

The ``Series`` represents the column from the data frame.  Like the data
frame, it has row (value) labels.  In our case, these are just numbers from 0.

We can convert this series, to another series that has the value ``True`` when
the age is *not equal to 0*, and ``False`` if it is equal to 0:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # Read RHS as "age_column value not equal to 0"
    >>> age_not_0 = age_column != 0
    >>> age_not_0
    0        True
    1        True
    2        True
    3        True
    4        True
    5       False
    6        True
    7        True
    8        True
    9        True
    10      False
    ...
    1770     True
    Name: age, Length: 1771, dtype: bool

This is called a *boolean vector*, because it is a sequence of *boolean*
values (``True`` or ``False``).  We can use this to select rows in the data
frame where the value is ``True``, and throw away the rows where the value is
``False``.  To do this, we use the ``loc`` function attached to the data
frame.  It *locates* values:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # Select rows in the data frame where the age is not equal to 0
    >>> brexit_good_age = brexit_age.loc[age_not_0]
    >>> brexit_good_age
          age  brexit
    0      37       1
    1      55       1
    2      71       2
    3      37       1
    4      42       1
    6      69       1
    ...
    <BLANKLINE>
    [1757 rows x 2 columns]

Now we want to ask what proportion of the respondents said that they voted
Remain or Leave.  Later we will try to work out whether the proportion is
consistent with the way that the UK voted in the referendum.

First we make a new data frame that contains only the rows for people who said
they voted No in the referendum (remain).  Remember, from the data dictionary,
that 1 is the code for a No vote:

.. nbplot::

    >>> # Select the cases who say they voted No (Remain)
    >>> # First, make a boolean vector, True for remain row, False otherwise.
    >>> is_remain = brexit_good_age['brexit'] == 1
    >>> remainers = brexit_good_age.loc[is_remain]
    >>> remainers
          age  brexit
    0      37       1
    1      55       1
    3      37       1
    4      42       1
    6      69       1
    ...
    <BLANKLINE>
    [774 rows x 2 columns]

Next we make a new data frame for those who claimed to vote Yes (leave) (code
2):

.. nbplot::

    >>> is_leave = brexit_good_age['brexit'] == 2
    >>> brexiteers = brexit_good_age.loc[is_leave]
    >>> brexiteers
          age  brexit
    2      71       2
    9      60       2
    17     74       2
    19     61       2
    20     47       2
    ...
    <BLANKLINE>
    [541 rows x 2 columns]

In this sample, what are the proportion of Leave voters, compared to all those
who will confess to a vote?  We use the ``len`` function to get the number of
cases in each data frame:

.. nbplot::

    >>> len(brexiteers)
    541

Now for the proportion:

.. nbplot::

    >>> len(brexiteers) / (len(brexiteers) + len(remainers))
    0.4114068441064639

As we saw in :doc:`brexit_problem`, the proportion of Leave voters in the
referendum was 51.9%.  That seems a way off.  Is it too far off?

Now let's have a look at the distribution of ages for the Remain voters:

.. nbplot::

    >>> plt.hist(remainers['age'])
    (...)

How about the ages of the Brexiteers?

.. nbplot::

    >>> plt.hist(brexiteers['age'])
    (...)

These distributions look different.  But |--| how different are they?  And how
confident can we be that this difference did not come about by chance?

Last, we will save the data to use it later.  First we stack the Remain and
Leave cases together into one long data frame:

.. nbplot::

    >>> remain_leave = pandas.concat([remainers, brexiteers])
    >>> len(remain_leave)
    1315

Next we save to a simple text file so we can load it later.  The format is
CSV, which stands for Comma Separated Values |--| commas separate the values
within each row.  In saving, we drop the index from the data frame, which just
contains the case numbers:

.. nbplot::

    >>> remain_leave.to_csv('remain_leave.csv', index=False)

To be safe, we check we can load back that file:

.. nbplot::

    >>> remain_leave_reloaded = pandas.read_csv('remain_leave.csv')
    >>> remain_leave_reloaded
          age  brexit
    0      37       1
    1      55       1
    2      37       1
    3      42       1
    4      69       1
    5      20       1
    ...
    <BLANKLINE>
    [1315 rows x 2 columns]

.. include:: links_names.inc
